after the process of dentification what
follows is another Reckoning why would a
society as advanced as Germany fall
victim to ideas that later on we all
understood to be so
[Music]
destructive hello
everybody I had the privileged today to
speak with aan hery Ali who I don't know
if you took the 10 bravest people in the
world she'd be one of them as far as I
can tell and she made a remarkable
Splash years ago with her first book
Infidel which talked about her
experience about moving from Somalia to
the Netherlands which is like the Center
of Western civilization and so that was
a great book and aan has had a very
storied political career to say the
least and uh a threatened life in many
way standing up against the Islamic
fundamentalists she's recently converted
to Christianity which is also a
stunningly Brave move for someone in her
situation and and she's launched a new
Enterprise called restoration which is a
a substack media Enterprise designed to
make a case for the necessary Primacy
and uh what would you say uh Bedrock
foundational necessity of the
presumptions of Western
Civilization um and so we had a chance
to talk about all that and so I would
say it'll be 90 minutes well worth your
while with the additional conversation
that I had with her as well on the daily
wire side so um welcome everybody uh
listen and Diane that's always
worthwhile she's she's a real force of
Nature and so uh as I said it was a
privilege to talk to her
again all right so you've recently
announced a new writing and media
Endeavor and I've been following that
quite avidly particularly on Twitter and
so called restoration and so do you want
to tell us how that came to be and what
it is and what you're hoping to
accomplish with it well restoration I
think the word says it it is my mission
is to restore um the our institutions
that you and I love to their original
missions um ideas
um our culture uh the origins and
history of our culture um institutions
like the family
schools the
university um Democratic
institutions uh what political parties
are supposed to do what our governments
are supposed to do what they're not
supposed to
do um and then uh discourse a lot of us
have been t talking quite a bit about
freedom of
speech and uh the the institutions that
protect freedom of speech um the Free
Press uh all of these have
been um in my view they've been
subverted there's been an an effort to
subvert our institutions and we're in a
place now
where uh we we
cannot uh communicate with people we
disagree with or we have a different
perspective from without immediately
seeing an enemy status in them and I
think the the the first and most
important thing to do is to to bring
back that Civic discourse when I came to
Europe in
1992 and and over the course of the
first 10 years of uh my residence there
uh conversations between people who
disagree with one another were seen as
What defined Europe and what defined the
west and what made it different from
other places and now look at where we
are and so restoration is U an attempt
to awaken people to uh recognize what's
at stake and and then to
restore um yeah in one word to restore
sanity okay so so you you brought up a
lot of points there which and I want to
delve into them one by one you I guess
I'll start with a an overarching
question and then drill in a little bit
um do you find yourself
surprised
to have developed the beliefs that you
have developed I mean in your
description of your project you pointed
to the you know the dissolution of Civic
discourse the threat to democratic
institutions the threat to our culture
the collapse of freedom of
speech
and those are
all all of those are serious charges
right especially let's say
the observation of
subversion
and it's difficult
to it's easy for let's see it's easy
for the apprehension of something like
subversion to be tossed into the
conspiracy theorist bin let's say that I
meaning the things that you've been
writing about in restoration and
pointing to they're they're quite
dramatic and so let's do two things the
first is why don't you talk a bit more
about what you mean by subversion where
that might be stemming from right
because that's well that's a mysterious
question and then also address the issue
of whether or not you find yourself
surprised to be in the position that
you're in having to say the sorts of
things let's say that you're saying to
be now so let's start with
subversion I the opening essay in
subversion the bulletin so my platform
on substack has to do with I I start by
describing the fact that many of us feel
that something is off
and that uh like in the parable of the
Buddhists we're all trying to figure out
what is it that is off so we're all
these blind people we're touching
different parts of the elephant and we
we're trying to figure out what this
hole
is um when I look at these uh you know
take any
list uh I'm in the academic wall and I
see what has happened to Academia from
the time I came as a student in 1995 in
the University of Leiden to my present
role uh at
Stanford and there is just this um
Channing out of very expensive useless
degrees in gender and race and you name
it that's the universities
K22 there is this crisis that I see
because I'm a parent uh parents around
me homeschooling their children um going
from a to be just completely confused
about what is it that's going on with
our education systems they're on the
brink of collapse there are these
statements that are contrary to reality
that there is an endless number of
genders there's this whole uh what
seemed like in you know 10 15 years ago
when I first heard about terms like
intersectionality and oppressor and
oppressed and all the rest of it it just
seemed like
to me
juvenile intellectual mishmash
nonsensical the sort of things that fast
year freshman is uh students uh dapple
in and then they grow up and they grow
out of it and then Along Comes
2020 and we have that incident with
George Floyd in the United States of
America and what then happens is what I
only see can describe as a revolution
because
we went full on with the defund the
police um let's abolish SATs and other
standardized tests mathematics uh is
racist everything is racist and and this
demolition clearly demolition of ideas
and institutions of like the family
education and uh I'm I'm looking at this
and I'm thinking this is
familiar um and let's pay attention to
the people who are leading the charge in
these projects to destroy the structures
that and the
institutions that have served us so well
and on the one hand you have these
identity politics cultural marxists that
have developed these elaborate Theory
theories that they call critical theory
critical theories and it's not a
conspiracy Theory Jordan they stated as
clearly as possible that they want to
bring down they they point to all of
these injustices and they say the answer
to all of this is to bring down these
structures and Destroy them and then on
the other hand I see the islamists and
the islamists have never really been
dishonest it was always in your face but
they fast tried many years to bring down
our system through
Terror and terrorist flots and
Relentless terrorist attempts and they
failed at that uh we are militarily and
economically and technologically
Superior to them and so obviously they
went down the path of Da which is a
religious subversion which is uh uh it
has a much longer
timeline and then of course you look at
the
CCP and Putin and these are external
adversaries and they're looking at
what's going on on our soil domestically
and they would be St stupid not to take
advantage of that um so as I try to uh
look into and analyze again think of me
as one of the blind men touching the
elephant is to say where have we seen
this before now communist attempts at
subverting the West are as old as as
communism they're as old
as um you know the times of the
Bolsheviks and Lenin and all various
marxists and when the Soviet Union was
established they had programs to subvert
us and it was Mutual we had programs to
subvert them um so when you listen I
quote Yuri basmanov at length where he
describes U their length um I I you just
listen to him and the institutions that
he describes and the intended effects of
that kind of subversion and it's right
before your eyes you don't really need a
conspiracy a theorist for that the
islamist it's the same thing what's
interesting about all of this is to see
this collusion between the islamists and
and the Neo marxists or cultural
marxists uh what is called the Unholy
green red Alliance some people describe
it as the watermelon and you think okay
where is this going qu for Palestine
looks nice in Colombia on a
um these things that on a plaque that
students hold up but what would queers
look like if they were actually in Gaza
or the West Bank we know what they look
we know what
happens um but that aside uh the
question of is there
subversion and is has it been effective
uh are we on the brink to all of that
the answer is yes and my remedy for that
is restoration recognize the institution
the ideas you know it's our Elites um
and and then we have to come together
and and restore this and so not together
in in this empty sort of platitudinous
ways but to say we used to what made us
different as Western societies is that
we used to disagree and actually we used
to think it was fun to disagree the
other day I had a debate with but I
didn't think of it as a debate I thought
it was a lovely conversation with
Richard Dawkins where
I mean we live in a world where a lot of
people who watched that discussion their
takeaway was not oh how
interesting um this one has to say that
and you know what are the arguments that
they're making Etc no it was um you know
there was suddenly this enemy friend
thing U yeah and and I think the for me
the the the greatest takeaway from that
whole thing was the hug at the beginning
and hug at the end that it is possible
to disagree on fundamental issues and
continue to have that affection for one
another and and if you don't want to
have affection for one another still you
know peaceful
handshake and and then well with with
Dawkins in particular like I've met him
a couple of times and I've read his
books and I learned a lot from his books
and one of the things that I've thought
about Dawkins all along and I think this
is reflected in the fact that he
described himself as a cultural
Christian recently is
that he is a good
scientist and a good scientist is
someone who strives to seek the truth
and I think that truth seeking is a
religious Enterprise and so a true
scientist is embedded in a religious
Enterprise and I think that's why
Richard Dawkins understands that he's a
cultural Christian but it's very there's
many things that Dr Dawkins and I don't
see eye to eye about but some of that is
because we don't understand each other
like a fair bit of it and some of it is
that the issue at hand is insanely
complex and difficult to figure out and
neither of us should be presuming that
we've got the right answer and then the
discourse that you're describing which
is competitive discourse should be
conducted in a manner that enables both
of the participants to further seek the
truth and then you actually want that
enmity so to speak you want the person
you're talking to to come at you with
ideas that you haven't heard and
positions that you haven't thought
through because in principle they move
you closer to the truth and so in
hypothetically Dr Dawkins and I will be
speaking at some time in the in the next
few months we're trying to arrange that
now and I'm looking forward to it
because I think that we can talk because
I think that he's trying to pursue the
truth and I found the same thing with
Sam Harris and I recently spoke to Dan
danet which went very well I managed to
speak to him in in a few short weeks
before his demise and we had a very
productive conversation and you want
conversations between people who don't
hold the same Viewpoint if they're
reliable people because that's where the
real thinking takes
place and so for me what you just
described was the defining feature of
Western Civilization I came from I was
born in Somalia and I lived in Saudi
Arabia and I lived in Kenya and I lived
in Ethiopia and then I landed in the
Netherlands in
1992 and there was so many differences
between the world uh the non-western
world I grew up in and the Western world
that I came to
but the one thing that I would say was
really different and was this that you
can't really have
these radically different views you can
be religious you can be atheist you can
be pro market you can be anti-market you
can in fact in the streets of America
shout the most anti-American things even
burn the American flag and that that is
protected that for me was
wow and when I say let's talk about
restoration I'm now seeing a breakdown
of that a near collapse of that on the
political level on the academic level on
the Civic level on the journalism level
we are breaking up into tribes like the
world where I came from where you have
not the pursuit of the truth but
ownership of the truth My Truth Versus
your truth and that kind of nonsense is
now a serious serious Dee rooted problem
in the west and that I think is an
outcome of subversion well okay so so
let's let's take that apart further so
you talk about a uh relapse into a kind
of tribalism of idea ownership so
there's a disintegration of something
that was unified into a more plur
ralistic tribal landscape okay so that's
one of the things let's Identify some of
the other characteristics of the
collapse so we could talk about
purposeful and accidental subversion so
let's start with the marxists with
regard to purposeful subversion okay so
KL
Marx split the world into oppressor and
oppressed in an envious
manner presuming that all the moral
virtue was with the oppressed and all
the evil was with the oppressor and that
that all could be understood from within
the framework of Economics so the
primary axis of Oppression and oppressed
for Marx was the economic axis and he
presumed that the reason that that
inequality between oppressor and
oppressed exist was because of the
structure of capitalism at least that's
what he claimed now whether or not he
believed that is a whole different issue
okay so now I want to take that in two
directions I want to point to how that's
metastasized into what I think is less
than ideally conceptualized as cultural
Marxism and I want to also discuss its
precursors its archetypal precursors
okay so what seems to me to have
happened and I want your thoughts on
this is that Marx established the
framework
for an elaborated victim victimizer
narrative but he basically stuck to the
economic realm when he made that case
now as the revolution unfolded what we
found out was that the subversion of the
capitalist order in favor of the
oppressed only produced the
universalization of poverty and produced
no viable redistribution of equity or
income and so by the 1970s the holess of
the economic approach to the victim
victimizer had been demonstrated so
thoroughly that even idiot marxists in
France were forced to accept it and so
you know the proof is compelling when a
French intellectual is forced to swallow
it and so then what happened as far as I
could tell is the
postmodernists who were all Marxist at
their core decided that there was no
utility in beating the economic
inequality drum anymore but that they
could fragment the victim victimizer
narrative into a metastasis and say well
the basic idea that it was a power
Dynamic that ruled everything was
correct but we underestimated the
seriousness of the power dynamic because
it shows up in
the relationship between men and women
and it shows up in the patriarchal
structure of the family and it shows up
in the dynamic of sex and then the
dynamic of gender and race and ethnicity
so all of a sudden you had victim
between countries sure sure between
races between tribes you can understand
the postmodern claim was you could was
that even though they purported
to dispense with the idea of a
superordinate meta narrative they
smuggled in the power narrative as the
fundamental
exploratory concept and then
metastasized it to account for to
explain the relations between human
beings regardless of how they
categorized themselves so that every
group categorization became a locus of
power and
exploitation right and so now we have a
metastic Marxism Okay so bringing it
forward now I want to bring it backward
and you tell me what you think about
this because I think Marxism itself is a
variant of something more deeper much
deeper
so there's a there's a Marxist likee
spirit that inverts the French
Revolution soon after it occurs and so
and that was well before Marx and and I
I've been thinking more archetypally
let's say in in Rel relationship to
fundamental stories that Marxism is a
variant Marxism versus capitalism let's
say as a variant of the story of Cain
and
Abel right because Cain and Abel is
really the first victim victimizer
narrative and it basically presents the
human moral
landscape because it's the first story
about human beings in history right cuz
Adam and Eve were in the Garden of Eden
let's say Cain and Abel are the first
two human beings that are born in the
world of history and they develop modes
of being that are antithetical to one
another with Cain being the oppressed
angry bitter malevolent murderous and
then genocidal
victim and Abel being the
successful right the successful
individual who strives forward aims up
and makes the proper sacrifices now
that's presented in the biblical Corpus
as the fundamental spiritual Division
and
Cain's failure to make the proper
offering and then his Rebellion against
God like there's a luciferian touch to
that and it's definitely something that
attracted Marx because Marx was
a admirer of mephistophiles of girth is
mephistophiles and mephistophiles was
the variant of the usur ing Spirit whose
motivation was nothing but destruction
you know you talked about the attack on
all the levels of subsidiary Society
simultaneously right I mean the marxists
definitely planned that we can't have
marriage because men and women are in a
power battle we can't have families
because the family is a patriarchal
oppressive institution we can't have
communities because all po should be
deeded to the state seeded to the state
Etc but it seems to me
that all of that has that roots in that
fundamental antagonism that's laid out
initially in the story of Cain and Abel
and what we are seeing is we're seeing
variant of that story play out and also
at an accelerated rate because of the
rate of technological change so well so
I've been thinking about those things a
lot that's what I've been lecturing
about on this last tour and in part
that's what my new book is about so
curious about your reaction first of all
to the idea of a metastasizing
Marxism and then to the idea that
Marxism itself is a variant of a it's a
retelling of a more fundamental
story um so fascinating and I'm glad
you're doing this okay so my two
reactions then or just as I was
listening to you
um one um thing that has occurred to me
is
marks and his work and his
legacy and what we've done with it so um
you know this history better than I do
but the reaction he was hoping for he
had created a new NE religion
Marxism it failed
because instead of people sticking his
followers his own disciples
sticking with his Revolution
goals what sprung
up is the reformists basically what I'm
getting at I'm schooled in political
science you're psychologist but it was
you know the left and the right the left
divided up into these two branches and
one branch is fully Marxist and
revolutionary and committed to the
Revolution and the other one becomes
reformist and I think that is the first
defeat of the Marxist idea that instead
of over Hing the capitalist system you
work within the capitalist system and
through incremental means everybody's
life gets better so that was the first
defeat up until
1989 the that whole economic argument of
take from the rich give to the
poor uh falls apart when it becomes I
think obvious if you if you stick with
the material economic uh the economic
top topic that the Soviet Union
collapses and not only is that does the
Soviet Union all have satellites
everywhere that's these five-year plans
touch you have Devastation you have
masses of deaths you have uh
concentration camps you have
starvation
um and then you look at the west and
there's growth and and so on so in 1989
I think there is this sense
the winners the Victoria those who are
victorious maybe you want to say you
were comparing Kan and Abel you can
say those who are
victorious make one big mistake in my
view after
1989 which is they forget about it they
think we've won this right history is
over history is over let's move
on the loser for the loser history is
never over for the loser history begins
when he loses he has to shake off all of
this and come up and come back and they
come back now with this idea of identity
groups of culture the person who can
tell this way better than I can is James
Lindsay who has been through all of
their Creeds and Creeds and is really
eloquent in the way he tells this right
right but they divert towards the
culture thing but my takeaway as as a
relatively new Westerner is
I come into this world of ideas good
ideas bad ideas I'm 22 years old I'm
trying to find an explanation for why
are these rich countries rich and
Powerful why are poor countries poor uh
I was a Muslim so it's like if we have
the as a Muslim if I have God's last
prophet God's last book God is on my
side then why are we poor and miserable
and and so on and so in that world of
ideas um in the 1990s when I'm going to
University I'm acquainted with the idea
of national socialism that nearly
destroyed European society and Western
society and what follows after the
defeat listen to this Jordan after the
defeat of national socialism what
happens is a an intense process of
denazification in fact using some of the
tools of subversion that bov speaks
about and after the process of
deification what follows is another
Reckoning of what was national socialism
and why would a society as advanced as
Germany fall victim to ideas that later
on we all understood to be so
destructive this is in in my classrooms
okay this is what's happening I I I come
into the West just as it's going through
that Reckoning of the idea and the idea
is um forensically scrutinized and
it it it becomes after we fully
understand what Hitler's uh ideas were
that this is something that would never
and should never happen again now this
is something we did not do to Communism
right right right definitely not yeah
after the fall of the Soviet Union there
was no campaign of decommunization or
Demar
ification of of everything and anything
there was no Reckoning so up until I
think
2002 2003 we were still finding
individuals who had been found to be
active or sympathizers with Hitler we
were trying them still we were still
trying to go after them and put them in
jail but we never did anything of the
sort with Marxism so the first thing I
noticed the big thing is of course this
this terrible idea keeps recurring and
it's tzes and it manifests itself in
different ways because for the young
Generations it never really has been
here this is what Marxism L to the the
death toll I mean we all have been
schooled in how many people actually
died but more interesting I think more
fascinating is the the nazzi
psyche do you know we we explored it to
the point
that right now there are conversations
we can't have have without everyone
referencing Nazism in fact I think one
of the reasons why Europe is completely
paralyzed when it comes to the issue of
immigration is because that there is
this Terror this fear that they might
fall again into that nasty Collective
Madness of putting putting people in
concentration clamps we haven't done
that to
to to Marks we haven't in ideas of Marx
and communism and I think it's a bit we
are a bit on the latest de side but we
should do it have you ever heard of a
data broker they're the middlemen
collecting and selling all those digital
Footprints you leave online they can
stitch together detailed profiles that
include your browsing history online
searches and location data they'll then
sell your profile off to a company who
uses it to deliver targeted ads no
biggie right well you might be surprised
to learn that these same data Brokers
are also selling your information to the
Department of Homeland Security and the
IRS I for one don't want the tax Band
showing up at my door because of some
search I did on my phone so I mask my
digital Footprints I protect myself with
expressvpn one of the easiest ways for
data Brokers to track you is through
your device's unique IP address which
also reveals information about your
location but expressvpn hides your IP
address making it much more difficult
for data Brokers to monitor track and
monetize your private online activity
expressvpn also encrypts 100% of your
network traffic to keep your data safe
from hackers when you're on public Wi-Fi
expressvpn works on all of your devices
phone laptop tablet you name it just tap
one button to turn it on and you're
protected it's that easy protect your
online privacy today by visiting
expressvpn.com Jordan that's
expressvpn.com Jordan and you can get an
extra 3 months free expressvpn.com
Jordan well okay so well you you you've
got two issues there that that run in
parallel because okay three so the first
is your observation
that we assumed too prematurely after
1989 and the collapse of the Soviet
Union that the spirit of Communism was
dead and buried right now if that spirit
is a reflection of something far deeper
say like the Eternal antagonism between
Cain and Abel then it's not going to be
dead and buried or at least it's not
going to stay buried without a lot of
work and your point is well we didn't do
that work now we might have thought that
the object lesson of the collapse of the
Soviet Union Plus the capitalist
transformation of China and the Triumph
of the democracies was enough evidence
that the West had something right but
apparently no the house cleaning wasn't
deep enough well then you point out
though that there there's an additional
problem which is
that we're not exactly sure how to
handle interesing conflicts at a deep
ideological level without falling preyed
is something like the worst excesses of
the Nazi regime it's like well let's
imagine for example that we did do
something like a Demar ification of the
institutions I've been thinking about
this in relationship to
universities so you know when
when musk took over Twitter and Demar
ified it he fired like 80% of the
people now I do not believe for a moment
that an institution like Harvard can
be reconstituted or
restored when all of the same players
are still in place and they're doing the
same thing with different words now you
know I just met a couple of Harvard
professors last week when I was in
Boston who are at the Forefront of the
genuinely active Free Speech movement at
Harvard they have I think 140 professors
that my number may be wrong but it's a
substantial number of professors who are
pushing the administration hard and have
and Harvard has claimed proclaimed in
the last couple of weeks like Stanford I
believe they've adopted an official
position of institutional neutrality at
least with regard to their public
utterances
but there's all sorts of machinations
still going on behind the scenes okay so
what's my point well if 80% of the
institutions are corrupt and that's the
accusation from the conservatives well
first of all that risks falling into the
hands of the radical leftists who say
while the institutions are corrupt we
told you so and so that's a big problem
but even worse it's like if the
corruption is as pervasive as you
indicate and I have every reason to
agree with you then how is it even
possible that these institutions can be
restored and reconstituted and how is
that possible without us falling into
something like ideological persecution
you know like I watch Chris rufo in
Florida and I I think Chris is aiming up
and I like Ron DeSantis and think he's
got a good moral kill but I could easily
see that their attempts to
exert legislative control from the top
over the universities could easily
devolve into a counterproductive Witch
Hunt and so okay so now what we're doing
about what I'm doing about that for
example is we're launching Peterson
Academy at the end of June and I'm
involved with Ralston College in in in
Georgia trying to generate institutions
that offer an alternative but I don't
have any idea at all how the
institutions that are already in place
can be Dem marifi so you're you have
your restoration Enterprise and that's
devoted to the same thing but that
doesn't help us with the nitty-gritty
here it's like the K through2 education
system is completely dominated by the
worst possible students of the worst
faculty at the university the faculties
of Education that's been going on for
four generations and it's completely
corrupt at every possible level okay
what the hell do you do about that in a
manner that you know doesn't become
oppressive and tyrannical in and of
itself
so have add her what are your thoughts
about that what I found uh wonderful
about
bezmenov's um
layout is that it allows you every time
to take a step back
so that you don't become part of the
subversion process yourself with what
you're
doing um and I think that's what you're
worried about is uh we don't want uh
Christopher rufo who I think is doing
admirable work by exposing the
corruption and by showing uh he he's he
he I just love his
grit um that how do we stop where do we
where do we stop you know how do we not
become part of I mean he he right how do
we not go too far how do we not go too
far so I think if we just have if we
step back from that table that that
basov lays out and you say
Okay um we are an open Society he makes
a distinction between open societies and
closed societies and we we know that the
characteristics of an open Society is
that
um it's easier for the for es of
subversion to access our
institutions and not only to access
those institutions but actually to use
uh the laws and the conventions of open
societies to establish themselves within
universities k212 and all the various
just within our
society and so we don't want to become
closed societies we have to pay the
price of being an open society and
remaining an open
society and one of those prices is this
permanent vigilance where we can never
forget what these ideological threats
are but also we must not allow ourselves
to fall into this stap of everything is
gone because I think if you say all of
these institutions are corrupt Beyond
repair uh in a way you do sort of um
Propel the subversion further and you
validate it and and I think um we have
to look at what are strengths are and
let's not forget we we have uh enormous
resources for instance the market so
when the Meltdown of our mainstream
media which is really a meltdown uh our
our the open Society what we responded
is this Independent Media which
obviously Elon Musk is this giant who
stood up to not uh just by establishing
Twitter but using his power and his
leadership to say this is what I stand
for so that his millions of followers
know what his morals are and what his
principles are so for me Elon Musk is
the definition of courage standing up to
all these different forces putting his
own um almost his life at stake and his
his life's earnings
and Elon Musk is this big visible guy
but there's so many people like that and
and I come across them every day so we
have all of all of these resources and
starting new things like new
universities New Media and I think
that's a good thing if only even to
catch uh some of those people who
despair of of the existing institutions
the brand Harvard is now now tainted I
think in many ways the brand Harvard is
ruined but I don't think we should throw
the baby with the bath water we should
not throw the baby out with the bath
water we should not declare that um the
IV league and all of the universities
that we have in America and and Beyond
in Western societies are Beyond repair I
think some of them are terminal and have
stage four cancer and it'll probably
cost more to try and rescue them than to
just let them die but I think there are
many that can be rescued Ben SAS has
made this very clear in Florida um you
just have to change the
leadership in some of these places in
other places you have to go much deeper
and you know
and and and turn around the
demoralization process the places that
are actually on the level of
destabilization try to turn those things
around but all of that starts with
leadership and we've got to find have
you talked to have you talked to John
schmers by any
chance um I don't think I have okay well
he's a military strategist at West Point
yeah right and he we just had a very
interesting discussion which you might
want to check out about how see it's
very much related for example to this
idea of densification that you described
so in his analysis of the history of
military endeavor he's also thought
through from a strategic perspective
some of what's necessary in the
transformation of Institutions because
certainly it was the case that after
Nazi
Germany most of the Germans it wasn't
like all the Germans who participated in
some ways in the Nazi regime were all
tried and executed or confined to
predition most of them except for a few
leaders were
regarded as
redeemable and the leadership transition
happened at the top and chers told me
you know I asked him what he thought
about the situation in Gaza because so
many of the Palestinians purport to
support the Hamas regime and its aims
and so a pessimist might say well that
has to be dealt with in the most severe
possible Manner and
Optimist and hopefully a realist would
say well no if you're careful in
analysis of the key people you can
produce a leadership change and then a
transformation of spirit let's say that
redeems people who've been possessed by
these pathological ideas and then like
Germany or like Japan which are Stellar
examples of this obviously and and and
uh well South Korea for that matter at
least in in terms of economic
transformation that great things are
still possible without
institutional Devastation so that is a
good vision of that is a good vision of
optimism if you can I and I suppose rufo
did that to some degree by focusing his
attention for example on Claudine gay
which was an object lesson that perhaps
many institutions took to heart and it's
also that is why the trajectory of
restoration is I hope is one that is
going to be
fruitful um
and it's I think we are in a place where
Jordan I've never been more
optimistic um and and the reason is
because people are waking up and they're
waking people who are I mean busy with
their Industries and busy with their art
with their music with whatever it is
that they were doing this subversion
virus is touch on everyone's lives um
there are people who are happy to ignore
these things because they hate trouble
they don't like politics they don't want
to be involved in other FS I'd say the
general public in the west
is is just loves going about their lives
and by the way that is you know when we
talk about Freedom most of us really
think about that is you know we we elect
people who represent us and
we pay taxes and I just want to go get
on with my life and that's no longer
possible people are feeling affected in
every way shape and form October 7
opened the eyes of many people our
friend Barry Wise I remember she said
everyone went to bed on October 7 and
was what did she say uh went to bed as a
liberal and work up as a conservative or
yeah you can well we'll see you can put
it fun like I well I wrote an article
which I'm going to read on my on my
YouTube channel and publish on my blog I
wrote an article I'll just lay it out
for you very quickly because I guess
it's a bit of a push back against your
optimism although I share that optimism
in a fundamental way um I don't want to
get optimistic too early so here's the
basic outline of the argument so um and
I sent it to the National Post in Canada
which always publishes what I wrote and
they took it and then rejected it and
then I sent it to the telegraph which
also always publishes what I send them
and they took it and edited it and then
rejected so this is what I said you know
it's a very contentious piece so I
pointed to the fact that in the United
States something approximating 75% of
the Jewish population supports the
Democrats now the problem with with that
is the
Democrats have allowed themselves to be
infiltrated by the radicals who they
will not attend to and whose existence
they deny and I know this full well
having worked on this issue for like
five years and talked to hordes of
moderate Democrats oh they don't really
exist oh they don't really mean that
it's like yeah they mean exactly what
they're saying the the radicals have
adopted the victim victimizer narrative
now the problem with that for the Jews
is that if we're going to play victim
victimizer and the victims are the
people who or the
victimizers are the people who are
successful then the Jews are first on
the firing line like they always have
been since the time of Exodus because
the Jews are the perpetually successful
minority and I think that's why they're
the canary in the coal mine is that when
a society flips and the successful
become the criminals let's say in the
eyes of the ideologues the first
criminals identified are the Jews
because they they are over represented
in positions of success and so part of
what I suggested and this is what Barry
Weiss has realized let's say is that um
the worst possible game for the Jewish
Community to play is any game that has
anything to do with a victim victimizer
narrative now there's something also
very interesting about that like I've
spent a lot of time looking at the Old
Testament in recent years and there's
something very interesting about the
Israelites at least in so far as they
maintain their alliance with the
prophetic tradition and the laws is that
every time something untoward happens to
Israel the prophets call upon the Jews
to take personal responsibility for that
and not to regard themselves as victims
no matter what to reestablish their
Covenant so that would be this
restoration and to proceed with cleaning
up the what would you say the cancer in
their own Souls first and that always
works and so well now you said that you
know things shift dramatically after
October 7th but I'm wondering like do
and this is with regards to your ISM
after October 7th we saw the
universities go so absolutely out of
their mind that kman
himself the president of
Iran congratulated them on their efforts
on his behalf and suggested that they
started reading the start reading the
Quran we saw these encampments and
occupations everywhere and that man I
was just in DC this week and there were
huge Pro Palestine Pro Iran
demonstrations everywhere so okay so
with all of
that what why is it do you think that
you're still
optimistic because it's outrageous like
that the supreme leader of Iran who
shouts and compels his population to
shout death with America for years and
who's been trying to achieve exactly
that and been trying to achieve the
destruction and annihilation of the
state of Israel finding Waters in our
Ivy Leagues and on our streets it's
exactly these outrages that
force uh the left in general and in
particular the Democratic party to face
the reality that you have been trying to
draw their attention to and that we've
all been trying to draw the there is
there are two branches of the left the
revolutionaries and there are the
reformists and the revolutionaries now
seem to be on top because this what you
call them
moderates um I think in academic jargon
they're the ones who are for reform they
they wouldn't say defund the police they
would say let's see what's wrong with
the police and let's tweak with the
institution not bring the institution
down so those moderates most moderate
lefts Mo moderate Democrats those who
are for reform I think they're having
reality rubbed in their noses now
and it's happening not because of what
you and I see but because of what these
outrages that we're
witnessing these so-called Pro Palestine
protests they are not pro Palestine
protests they're Pro Hamas protests and
they're seeing this for themselves the
slogans things that these people are
shouting and not only just what they
shout but I think even the tiniest
amount of curiosity will take you to go
and take a Peak at this syllabi the
syllabuses that are uh taught in these
universities what is it that these kids
are learning and you go through these
books courses images that they taught
and you see immediately left or right
that there's something there that
shouldn't be there and so I see this
Awakening I see these Mega doners who
are giving billions and billions to what
they thought was social justice coming
around and seeing hang on a minute and
many of them are Jewish and looking at
this and thinking hang on a minute this
is not what my philanthropy was about so
I think there is a long awaited
audit um that that is about to happen
that is happening and so in order to get
to this point of restoration we have to
do the audit first and we have to do it
together that is uh the moderate left
the moderate Democrats the moderate
Republicans and conservatives it is
those people on either side of whatever
the argument is of the moment to
actually freeze for a moment some of
these issues and say hang on how do we
cope with this enemy that really wants
to rip things apart this these
revolutionary uh groups and so and and I
and I see more and more people asking
these questions and what I find
delightful is that every time one of the
people who wasn't aware of these things
who wakes up he says I'm the fasion to
see it or and it doesn't matter it's
great it's great because they think why
didn't I see it in the past I was having
conversations in 2005
2006 that if the islamist driven
anti-Semitism continues
unchecks in that infrastructure of Da
where they building mosques and madrasas
and preaching and and then it went
online if that goes unchecked all you
have to do is Compare the numbers the
number of Jewish people in the west
versus the number the increasing number
of Muslims that are being radicalized
through these daa efforts and people who
are converted into Islam and down the
road you are going to have a huge
problem and uh some of the people I was
talking we have it now already we have
but I was saying this in 2004 2005 oh
yes oh yes yes of course so and and the
reason for having those conversations
was they were making demands the
political islamists were making demands
that the Holocaust cannot be taught in
school they're not talking about Muslim
Schools they're talking about public
schools public schools in the
Netherlands in France in Germany Etc and
the leaders of that time were through
consensus trying to be nice and
accommodating why saying all right then
um we we'll we'll just not teach that
that is 2004 2005 they were shouting
Hamas Hamas Jews to the gas they were
disrupting um um the commemorations to
the death of the people who died during
the second world
war and all of that was at that time 15
20 years ago it was seen as it's going
to
pass the longer they live here the more
they will integrate and assimilate they
will become like us now 20 years on no
we are becoming like them and people who
are well the same thing's true of China
oh yes right we assumed that if we
brought China into the West that China
would become Western and what's
happening instead is that at the first
hint of serious trouble let's say the
pandemic the so-called pandemic we
became China and so and it's not obvious
at all that the CPCC is budging and it
is absolutely obvious that they're
building the eye of soron and would like
to produce a totalitarian state so
absolute that we can hardly even comp
comprehend it and they're a long way
ahead with doing that sleep is a
foundation for our mental and physical
health in other words you've got to have
a consistent nighttime routine to
function at your best but if you're
struggling with sleep then you've got to
check out Beam Beam isn't your
run-ofthe-mill sleep aid it's a
concoction carefully crafted to help you
rest without the grogginess that often
accompanies other sleep remedies a bunch
of us here at the daily wire count on
beam's dream powder to knock us out and
sleep better through the night so we can
show up ready for work the next day just
mix beam dream into hot water or milk
stir or froth and then enjoy before
bedtime then wake up feeling refreshed
without the next day grogginess caused
by other Sleep Products dream contains a
powerful allnatural blend of RI
magnesium eleanine appenine and
melatonin to help you fall asleep stay
asleep and wake up refreshed and with it
now being available in delicious flavors
like cinnamon cocoa chocolate peanut
butter and mint chip better sleep has
never tasted better and today listeners
of this show can get a special discount
on beam's dream powder get up to 40% off
for a limited time when you go to shop
beam.com Peterson and use code Peterson
checkout that's shop
for up to 40%
off okay so let me let me to ask you
let's turn a bit here we've done a bit
of diagnosis we've talked about the
pervasiveness of the problem we've
talked talked about your hypothesis that
we have to do a very careful
consideration of the current
circumstance and identification of the
leaders let's say um we have to confront
face Toof face the pervasive subversion
of our institutions we have to separate
the wheat from the chaff and reestablish
them and we have to move towards
restoration you can see in that sort of
a
confession what would you say a
confession a
um and a move towards atonement and so
on the restoration side so let's delve
into that now the first question might
be well what exactly are we restoring
and I've been talking to some of the
principles at the alliance for
responsible citizenship about exactly
this in the last weeks trying to plot
our way forward and so in the alliance
for responsible citizenship we off we we
identified six or seven key domains
right restoration of the nuclear family
Unapologetic support for the idea that
the nuclear family is the minimal viable
social unit right the we support for the
notion that energy should made be made
as lowc cost and freely accessible and
what easily accessible to people within
a market framework as possible so that
we can work towards eradicating absolute
poverty environmentalism as stewardship
and not as what would you say
apocalyptic fear-mongering in the
service of the tyrants concern about
globalization and Regulatory capture and
fascist corporate capitalist
collusion um the telling of a better
story and we've more recently agreed
that all of that is integrated into
something approximating let's say your
vision of restoration is that we're
trying to put the
underpinnings of Western Civilization
back in place and trying to make a very
strong case including to people like
Richard Dawkins and Douglas Murray well
and and even you in some ways until
recently let's say that there is a
relationship between the foundations of
Western culture and something that's
even deeper that's not political and so
that's the next thing I wanted to talk
to you about so and maybe we could
approach that
you I guess we could approach that
personally now for a long while in my
understanding after you moved to the
west and you became more acutely aware
of the advantages of free discourse and
of the tyrannical aspect of the
philosophical milu that you'd been
raised in you were an admirer admirer of
the west but also attracted towards the
more atheistic philosophy let's say that
was put forth by Dawkins and Harris and
Hitchens and the the horsemen of the
atheist movement and and so do you want
to walk us through that a little bit if
you would before that I had read
Jonathan Israel um yeah I mean we don't
have much time so and I don't want to
make a caricature of this uh of of what
I believe is a very important if not the
most important aspect of of the
restoration
is uh the roots to seek The Roots I say
Christians sometimes we say Jude or
Christian Roots of what has
made you know the foundations on which
these societies are
built yeah well we'll take the time I'm
not going to rush you for sure I'd like
to let this unfold because it's
crucially important yeah on the personal
side as I have told it a few times and
it's very very
personal um I have had
uh my own Awakening that has to do with
um mental uh breakdown
um depression anxiety all of these
things the meaning and purpose of life
and not
finding I just couldn't find it I didn't
find it in the material
world and I to to give you an example if
you think of someone like me who comes
from um you know I grew up in a
childhood where there was very
little um little of everything little
food little water no water I mean we we
didn't have running water um um scarcity
uh not there were people who were poorer
than us but we were poor
uh I remember books I I loved books and
they weren't books so you know sometimes
I would finish uh a book that I borrowed
or that we borrowed from the library and
the last few pages which is where the
resolution of the story is uh would have
fallen out of that book and I would go
to a Bookshop pretend I was buying the
book actually read the last pages in the
book shop and then leave until our
Indian uh book sellers noticed what we
were doing and chased us out of the so
that level of yeah of poverty and so
then I come where there's plenty and I
find myself in my 40s and
50s um surrounded by absolutely every
materially completely
satiated uh happily married two children
everything that you would describe would
give meaning and purpose and yet there I
was
completely uh yeah depressed and unhappy
and terrified and
all the rest of
it
and uh and I was self-medicating I was
self-medicating with with with wine with
alcohol and and that was where my my
goto was that actually brought itself
brought me on the brink of
Destruction and I I sought help
and the help went from obviously with my
me focusing
on uh the material again uh scientific
help I'm going to see people who I trust
to be the professionals who will fix me
and fix this need and and that didn't
happen uh they were good people I
learned a lot I learned a lot about the
human brain the human psyche I respect
and and I'm still a huge admirer of some
of the people that I saw but the one
person who made a change was you're
looking in the wrong
places uh hard
diagnosis was what you're going through
is uh it's spiritual
bankruptcy MH and once I in my uh sort
of last moment of Despair when I allowed
that to come in and to to
register
um and I I surrendered to that uh it's
only after that uh
literally on my knees in
prayer that things started to
change and so on a personal level and
this is extremely subjective I'm not
imposing it on anyone else um I have
undergone this change that has
transformed My
Life
um if you allow me to go a little bit
beyond it is when I look around and talk
to the same people who were in the same
boats as I am or as I
was um the stories we share are stories
of this abiding success over many
years and it's the people who who went
down the path of spirituality to
fix what it was that bottomless void the
Cravings the endless thoughts that
colonize your head and never go
away so again this isn't a
statistical empirical study this is
purely anecdotal I see people who keep
on failing I see people I think have
some success and I look at them and it's
the ones who went down that spiritual
path and when I say that when I say
spiritual path I'm not saying it's
Christianity or any other
Faith or organized Faith it's just for
some people it's it's Buddhism for some
people
it's mindfulness and
and like Harris for example yeah yeah
and I and I don't think I don't know I
mean I haven't really talked to Sam
Harris about his spiritual welfare
but I've talked to him a bunch about it
you know and it's clear that Sam you
know Sam has found in the realm of
something approx ating an ineffable and
non articulate Buddhism the spiritual
sakur that that materialist atheism
lacks and I think the reason that Sam
was attracted to the
more
abstract religious domains of experience
the ones that aren't articulated into a
Creed which is something he really still
rejects is because Sam knows perfectly
well that if the Transcendent that he's
making contact with through his
meditative practice was transformed into
a Creed that his ravenous luciferian
intellect would just shred it in a
moment and he'd be right back where he
started this is also why I think I am
like if you look on the Christian
Revival side of things that the
Christian denominations that are growing
most rapidly aren't the more explicit
Protestant formulations they're the
really
conservative branches like Orthodox
Christianity and even Latin Mass
Catholicism because those religious
practices are so densely embedded in the
ritual and the ceremonial that they're
almost impervious to rational critique
right because how do you you can't
criticize A Hymn you can't criticize a
beautiful building like they speak for
themselves and so and so so let me ask
you a personal question if you're you're
I want to comment on on on Sam and see I
think I think Sam is he's he's just got
this commitment to The Pursuit Of
Truth and so I haven't spoken to him
since my conversion and I'm going to
make the I've been very busy I know he's
I know he's also very very busy but I
would be really fascinated to have a
conversation with him about it because
um yes that's necessary he is just so so
committed to and so when when we talk
about these different levels of
consciousness and different levels and
ples of perception I am so curious to
know what he thinks of that what he
would say about that I've spoken to
Richard Richard is also another pursuer
of Truth and I think in many ways that's
why Richard has come to the conclusion
that he is a cultural Christian and that
Christianity has has a a value in that
sense but again I really do want to
separate these uh two things where
I'm still at heart a classical liberal
in the sense I really do want to
respect people's conscience and people's
um um people's perceptions and the way
people live and so in no way imposing
anything saying oh you know I've gone
through this uh a terrible experience
and I've come out of it and now Heavens
everybody has to come to Christianity
that is not that's not what I'm saying
um I'm saying in my work in the realm of
ideas and in in this quest to understand
subversion who is subverting us and all
of
this
Christianity um is one of probably the
most important idea for us to grasp even
if I were an atheist I would say that
the most important ideas to grasp
because it takes us to the roots of of
our civilization and if you want to
reject parts of it that's okay but I
think the wholesale rejection of
Christianity and it is legacy is
precisely what brought us where we are
that's that's why we're in the sorts of
trouble we are
in are you or someone you know fighting
the battle against cancer for the last
25 years invita medical centers have
been pioneering personalized cuttingedge
treatment programs for patients all over
the world invita has been the leader for
patients looking for advanced
immunotherapy and genetically targeted
therapies all while focusing on fewer
side effects and better patient outcomes
as a global leader in oncology care
invita is committed to healthcare
freedom for all they've spearheaded a
revolution in employer health insurance
options empowering companies to provide
their employees with access to not only
Top Doctors Hospitals and Technologies
but also the firstof its kind Nationwide
personalized medicine coverage invita is
doing all of this plus offering
significant tax and cost savings full
transparency and Liberation from the
grip of commercial insurance carriers
whether you're a patient in need or a
company looking to break free of
monopolized healthcare insurance invita
could have the solution for you to learn
more about their treatment options visit
inv vita.com or visit invit health.com
to learn more about their company
insurance programs that's inv Vita
spelled
nv.com for treatment options or inv
vitah health.com to learn more about
their company insurance
programs one of the things that I've
come to realize tell me what you think
about this this took a lot of thought to
conjure
up I guess it was brought home to me
with particular Force I did a
documentary with Jonathan Paso in
Jerusalem and we walked the Stations of
the Cross and then we ended up in the
Church of the Holy sepulture and I
learned some things about that church
that I didn't know
historically so I didn't know that it
was founded by Constantine's mother and
I didn't know that it was really the
First Christian Church and and it's on
the site it purports to be on the site
of the crucifixion okay so when I was
there a bunch of
images so I was in the church and then I
was in the center of the church and then
I was in a small room at the very center
of the church that contained a cross
very elaborate cross and so I was in the
center of the center of the center of
the center let's say and a bunch of
things fell into place realizations fell
into place so the first thing I
understood was that European towns were
based on the model that was if not
established at least substantively
elaborated upon by Constantine's mother
we have a ceremonial building in the
shape of a cross at the center of the
town and so it's the staff in the ground
around which the town is
organized and in the center of the
church we have an altar that's the
center and on that there's a ritual of
sacrifice being conducted and so what
we're acting out is the proposition that
SA sacrifice is the core of the
community and so now I've been thinking
about that biologically because I'm an
evolutionary psychologist let's say at
least in part and what I've come to
understand is that there's no difference
between the process of true cortical
maturation and the process of
self-sacrifice they're the same thing
because to be in a
community you have to give up what's you
have to offer up what's
narrowly
individual right so when you socialize a
toddler you help the toddler integrate
his or her primordial biological
urges
their intrinsic Hedonism you help them
integrate that into a framework that
enables them to understand that they
have a future and can't act to destroy
that and understand that they have to
exist in relationship to other people
and so that's a kind of Harmony it's a
sacrificial Harmony and so what that
means if that's true and I can't see how
it can be not true is that Society
itself is based on the principle of
sacrifice work is sacrifice because you
sacrifice the pleas pleasures of the
moment to the community and the future
right and the community itself is a form
of sacrificial organization so then if
you accept that and I can't see how you
can formulate an argument to the
contrary if you accept that the the next
question that emerges is well what's the
ultimate or ideal form of sacrifice and
the Christian passion is a portrayal
of something approximating the final
sacrifice right it's a union of
sacrifice of child and self so those are
the two most brutal forms of sacrifice
it's an rejection of power in
relationship to that sacrifice so
there's no indication whatsoever that
the
fundamental uniting principle of
Christian the Christian world is power
quite the contrary because Christ never
resorts to power regardless of the
provocation and so what we have at the
core of our culture is the recognition
that sacrifice is Central and then the
elaboration of a pattern of ultimate
sacrifice that involves it's it involves
something like exposing yourself to the
full force of mortal vulnerability and
the full reality of evil that's the
harrowing of hell and as far as I can
tell I've written all this out in great
detail in this new book of Mine by the
way as far as I can tell I can't see
anything about that that's not in
keeping with what we know at the deepest
levels in the world of evolutionary
psychology and I can't see anything
about it that's erroneous on the
conceptual side cuz how could community
be anything other than the result of of
the sacrificial gesture on the part of
the individual I mean if you're a wife
you sacrifice your whims to the marriage
yeah if you're a mother you sacrifice
your narrow self-interest to your
children if you're a family in
relationship to other families you
sacrifice the narrow interest of your
family to the harmony of the community
and so on all the way up the subsidiary
hierarchy and you know at the end of
TL's confessions I don't know if you
ever read that but it's it
details something very much like what
you described happening to you so
Tolstoy became suicidally desperate at
the height of his Fame and Earthly
material success he was an unbelievably
rich man he was known all over the world
he was a great literary figure people
compared him to Shakespeare he had a
wife and a flourishing family like on
the purely material front Tolstoy had it
nailed and he was so suicidal that he
was afraid to walk alone around his
Estates and he had a dream and this is
how confessions end he dreamt that he he
was suspended in an immense space and he
was looking down into the abysmal
bottomless pit of despair let's say but
he was
suspended and he turned around and
looked up and realized that there was a
cord around his waist made of gold and
the cord extended upward into the sky
past where he could see and so he was
suspended over the abyss of Despair by a
relationship with what was Transcendent
and highest right it's like an image of
Jacob's Ladder it's that extends up into
the ineffable stratospheres that that is
our Ally you might say is our Ally
against
what the terror of mortality and and
malevolence and as far as I can tell too
that that's that's not some ignorant
Superstition that's a foolish way of
considering it it's it's actually the
way the proper order of the cosmos is
constituted and okay now you talk to
Dawkins right publicly in New York and
you are friends I believe and I presume
still are and so yeah yeah yeah so so
tell me about that conversation and how
it went and what you concluded and it's
such a fascinating thing to have happen
I'd love to see you talk to Sam Harris
but what I concluded is what I started
off with when we when we started this
conversation which is that um I think it
is always a wonderful
experience uh to have to come at uh a
subject from these radically different
viewpoints um and hold your viewpoints
and argue for your viewpoints and
maintain the level of
mutual affection and respect and
friendship and so for me that was really
it was very very important that that
Richard and I demonstrated that and uh
again that's what we're trying to
restore uh what else
um Richard ended with uh a sentence if
to watch that where he says
okay so he he's he's not convinced he
thinks of course it's a heap of nonsense
but still he says uh uh he does
recognize the difference between Islam
and Christianity he does recognize the
threat of political Islam and his
conclusion was maybe we should take
something small to inoculate us against
the larger virus now different people
may here that differently but I think
that's coming from like a wafer
something small like a wafer like that
small you
mean that's yeah well that's but that's
exactly the symbol that's the mustard
seed that Christ talks about right
that's something small it's like it's
small all right but it's alive and don't
underestimate its power and so so see
the the thing that I I see as telling
about Dawkins I wouldn't say admission
but realizing Iz ation right that he's a
cultural Christian it's like okay when
you're pushed against the wall would it
be the Christians or the Islamic
fundamentalists that you choose and
Dawkins looks at that and he thinks well
I can't even talk about the Islamic
fundamentalists and at least I can
criticize the Christians so there's
something they're doing right it's like
okay there's something they're doing
right yeah okay that means there's a
right there that isn't in the other
domain the domain of fundamentalist
power let say well what is that that
lein that that small thing that makes
Christianity in its Western form
preferable to fundamentalist tyranny
well it's not something little it's
something absolutely fundamental and
vital right and so it seems to me that
it's incumbent on Dawkins to really
understand just exactly why when push
comes to shove that he's a cultural
Christian and so well I'll leave that
well yeah and and I think also so my
other takeaway was that he we were uh
coming at it from I had AC I was an
atheist just like him and then and I
didn't when I was an atheist did not
accept the existence of these different
planes of Consciousness or perception or
um what have you didn't have the
language for it and by the way I was
also in a state of rebellion h i i i was
and I I didn't want that and and so the
statements all religions are the same uh
were ones that I sort of lazily
accepted um and and I think Richard now
recognizes no not all religions are the
same A and B I hope I hope that he also
recognizes I don't know we didn't get
anywhere with that but I think the
conversation started with there are
different ways of appreciating reality
and uh you know we cannot
have uh an
experiment that will measure as
accurately as possible the impact of
Music on on on your psyche on on your
perception or the appreciation of works
of art so there are so many ways of
appreciating reality that is not you
know the purely reducible naturalistic
yeah uh empirical science uh the
falsifiable and the
verifiable uh this that whole story of
what if we rewind the tape uh would
things look the same or not we can't do
that and
so it's also we've got to be very
careful
because um I think we are
having discussions
about uh religion and history and so on
and and then we're using the standards
of today this is one of the things that
I think is Despicable about the
woke is they haul people from the past
and judge them by the merits and by the
standards and by the the insights of
today yes well and the do people doing
that comparison always come out ahead on
the personal side which is you know a
little bit on the suspicious you might
regard that as a rather suspicious
Endeavor if you're playing a game you
always win you might ask yourself
whether or not you're just playing it so
that you always win rather than to get
it the truth I mean it's pretty fun for
an undergraduate to presume that they're
the moral Superior of George Washington
let's say or Winston Church Hill I mean
what a deal you're 18 you have an idiot
Professor who talks to you for 10
minutes and your first revelation is
that you're better than the best men of
the past now that's a little bit too
attractive for my liking I would say
yeah so so I don't know how we veed from
this but I think what you said also goes
to the classics in general the ditching
of the classics where we said oh well
okay uh look at the list of books that
students are to read and it is my Angelo
Shakespeare my Angelo Shakespeare
Shakespeare out let's read my Angela and
right right same thing that's part of
the death of God yeah yeah yeah I don't
want to say anything I'm not saying
there's anything wrong with my Angelo I
think she's done a fantastic work but
she's no Shakespeare and you know we
should be able to have the courage to
say we are not going to remove
Shakespeare Dante well right well that's
part of the undermining of the
fundamental Traditions that's part and
parcel of this decimation of the
institutions at every level it's part of
total Revolution the total Revolution
Marx called for and the upending even of
the Norms of sex identity by the queer
activist let's say it's complete chaotic
Revolution yeah and it's got to stop so
let me ask you another difficult
question if you don't mind maybe we'll
close with this one I I was Ill during
the time the Abraham Accords were
established and when I kind of woke up
and was healthy again and saw what had
happened I thought it was something
approximating a miracle and I was amazed
that it wasn't front page headline news
in every country in the world because I
think what the people who formulated the
Abraham Accords achieved was
the closest thing to a foreign policy
miracle that I've seen in like 70 years
and so so now and then and then part of
the reason I'm optimistic at the moment
like you are is that despite October 7th
the Abraham Accords have held and I've
heard from behind the scenes that the
Saudis are still quite willing to
contemplate signing it even under the
present conditions there's political
issues that have to be sorted out but
they're still on board okay now I'm
going to add to that one other thing one
of the connection points between Islam
and Christianity is the figure of Jesus
is the figure of Christ and so what I
see happening on the optimistic side in
the Islamic world is that there are
actors like the leaders let's say of the
UAE and and and some of the other ISL is
Islamic States who appear to want
to establish something like an anant and
a
dialogue and that it might be possible
that there could be at least the
exploration
of cooperation or a competition of
invitations between Islam and
Christianity instead of this allout drag
down knock him de
dead
fundamentalism it it seems to me as well
that the cluster B psychopath types are
very good at weaponizing Islam and that
we need to separate out the psychopathic
types who are basically Pharisees who
claim religious motivation while
pursuing nothing but their own aims we
need to separate that out on the Islamic
side too and see maybe see if because
there is such admiration in the Islamic
world for the figure of Christ if
there's something there that would
enable us to
establish the beginnings of a deep
abrahamic dialogue and so I'm wondering
this is a world you're more familiar
with in many ways than me although also
more more hurt by than than me I mean
what do you think of the abrahamic cords
and do you have any optimism on the side
of on taant let's say between Islam and
Christianity or between Islam
Christianity and Judaism to broaden the
net
appropriately so what do I think of the
abrahamic Accords I think if we lived in
a fairwell the people who brought about
the abrahamic Accords would get the
Nobel Peace PR but we don't live in our
yes um and what I find uh I really
admire Jared Kushner in the sense that
he tried something new he and this is
why sometimes it's good to have people
come in from the
outside and break open something so our
state department has been doing the same
thing over and over again for what the
last 50 years if not the last 20
years and this man whose politics is not
his thing comes into this realm and says
let's try something new and that's Again
part of the American Spirit by the way
let's try something new yes definitely
definitely definitely and there
something new yields um the abrahamic
Accords and yeah the people who didn't
get anywhere all those years obviously
they don't take kindly to that which is
unfortunate because it shouldn't have
been that's for sure yeah it should
shouldn't have been condemned as oh we
hate Trump anything that Trump does we
deplore it should have been claimed as
an American victory it didn't that's
right that's an opportunity Biden had I
think he could have given Trump a medal
and a ceremony and he might have ridden
off into the sunset you know because
Trump deserved an award for that he
deserved the Nobel Prize for the Abraham
Accords absolutely and so uh and and the
figure of Jared uh I think um yeah yep
definitely so we we go from there to uh
you know is there what what in Christian
Theology and Islamic theology can we
find points and things that we have in
common
um you know I remember Bernard Lewis uh
who I think died at the age
of3 and one of the uh I would say best
Scholars of
um all three of the abrahamic but he was
a historian and he had really spent a
good long time studying the Middle East
and spent years and years there and he
kept saying we have more in common than
me the ey um and especially with AIA so
there's a lot we have in common from a
theological
perspective
the people you know these you call them
what if you call them cluster B bombs or
whatever these these radical
groups um have done something that if
you did it to Christianity you would say
this is what Martin Luther did during
the Reformation he say let's go back to
scripture we don't want the church and
interceptors between us so when someone
who identifies as Christian goes back to
scripture pure and
simple what they find there
is radically different
from what you know an average Muslim
when he's told go back to scripture and
let's go back to the beginnings of
Muhammad let's go back to the time of
Medina let's go back to the time of the
conquests uh what they find there is is
a different message and so I think for
leaders like the leaders of the UAE of
Saudi
Arabia uh for
them they realized after the Arab Spring
with the rise of Isis but even before
the rise of Isis um when Bin Laden was
in Afghanistan and and they supported
him and they they knew you know these
radical elements kept coming and they
would just bash them or export them
elsewhere or accommodate them um that
over time they actually came for their
own seats of power and for their own
families and their response was we
Define Islam so it is the Crown Prince
right now of Saudi Arabia uh who defines
what Islam is for the Saudis and the
world Beyond and living in the society
they live
in they round up the savat and the
insurgents who operate in the name of
wahhabism and salafism and the various
flavors of political Islam
and they domesticate them they can do
that and the same with the UAE and they
then the Crown Prince and the sultan and
the king and and the leader of the day
they decide
um in their definition of what Islam is
that we want to recognize the state of
Israel and we now want we think we have
more in common with our Jewish neighbors
and brothers and our Christian neighbors
and brothers uh then you de Us in the
world that you're leading us to
towards the the path of Hamas of
al-Qaeda of Isis of the Muslim
Brotherhood that is a path of
destruction and they've given us a taste
of it when the Islamic State was
established in Iraq and Syria so we know
where that goes and they reject it that
doesn't mean that they've yeah that
doesn't mean they've accepted liberal
democracy or that they've become like us
right right right no no I no right
their conclusion for their own Survival
has led them to accept the Abraham
Accords and to say we can we can
recognize and we can we can make our
societies recognize now I think Jordan
the next thing that has to happen and
maybe is happening is there has to be
not just on the political
level that we want to establish the
Abram Accords and sign peace and trade
deals I think the next level is to
deify Muslim societies the propaganda
that Muslim societies were fed about the
Jews and about the Christians and about
modernity in the last 70 or so years it
has to be undone and so there has to be
a new information and knowledge uh uh
Warfare uh not propaganda but counter
propaganda yeah yeah yeah that emphasiz
es for people in the Middle East for
Muslims a life a narrative and a story
and a theology that emphasizes a life of
death better well yeah well that's what
we've been trying to
do with this Arc Enterprise in London
right is to
formulate so you know you talked about
it in terms of counter propaganda but I
but I think it it's more appropriately
formulated uh pardon my objection as a
what would you say a far more attractive
invitation you know like if so my
students used to ask me about what I was
teaching at Harvard and at the UFT
they'd ask me well why isn't this just
another form of the ideology that you
reject and you know that's a very good
question it's the post-modern question
fundamentally why isn't this just
another power game let's say well I
think well I think I figured that out
Ian so I think the spirit of
play is the antithesis of the spirit of
tyranny and play can only occur if the
players are playing voluntarily and with
their full
ascent and so you can tell an ideology
from an invitation because an in
ideology manipulates and compels but an
invitation offers the possibility of
joint Mutual voluntary play and so you
know what we what we've been struggling
with at ARC and what I'm trying to do in
my lectures is to formulate an
invitation right a story that's
attractive and believable enough so that
all other competing ideology ideological
stories are revealed as corrupt
inadequate and what would you say
anxiety-provoking and hopeless yeah and
so right and so I think we could in this
restoration project let's say because I
think we share the same vision on that
front it's very useful to understand
that the best form of counter propaganda
is a much better invitation that's
actually real and believable you know
for example well why who would oppose if
they had any sense the idea that we
should drive energy costs down so that
we could eradicate absolute poverty like
what you might say well that's not
practical and fair enough we could have
that discussion but I think it is highly
practical and also
completely possible and
so I can't see why left and right alike
can't get on board with that it's not
like right-wingers who have any sense
like the fact that they're a poor people
you know they might be inclined to
deserve to to presume that some of the
poor deserve to be poor because they're
really not putting their best foot
forward but by the same token most
conservative types are perfectly
cognizant of the fact that to some
degree economic fa is arbitrarily
distributed and we should do some work
to try to ensure that the poor Thrive
and so the restoration should be an
invitation right this is a better way
yeah here's the better
way I think the best way the the first
step of restoration is to bring these
people together in the same room I think
for me the assumption is the moderates
on either side they have more in common
than some some of these problems imagine
we're not talking about
uh you know Harry Truman had to consider
whether or not to throw the bomb um
Roosevelt had to consider whether he
wanted to enter the war or not
um when St Churchill had to consider
whether to declare war or not because
Chamberlain was there saying let's
accommodate and a peas and so
on the Soviet Union pigs of bay remember
the leaders in the Oval Office some of
the considerations that they had to make
we're not there our our problems
compared to that of previous generation
is so it is these things are so easy to
address the problem is I don't know part
of it is subversion and part of it is
this ret tribalization of Western
Society is that we hate the other one so
much that is is we're willing to destroy
it's not even about the issue anymore
it's about the person and so I think the
first step is to
restore the humanity of the person on
the other side yeah well that's a turn
the other cheek that's a turn the other
cheek ethos right is that what you want
to work for if you can if you have any
sense is the not the eradication of your
so-called enemy but what would you say
his redemption in a manner that allows
you both to cooperate and compete
peacefully and productively that's a
much better better that's a much better
aim and your point is well we're not so
much at each other's throats that
there's blood in the streets and so we
could still have the conversations the
difficult conversations and the
negotiations
and what extend the Accords across the
Waring tribes and I do I do think that's
possible absolutely but look at look at
our like where we are with our
technology and where we are with economy
and where we are with we we just have
for me I think we just have an overflow
of resources and even human resources
the smartest people in the world and
still again look at the whole world
still wants to come here regardless of
um of the problems we have so I mean it
is like we've got it's easy I think
right now to come back from these stages
of demoralization and into some degree
destabilization that's that's a very
good place to end I would say this
discussion at least for everybody
watching and listening I'm going to
continue talking to aan on the daily
wire side um we'll Del delve into what's
more autobiographical and continue to
elaborate the ideas that we're
discussing here so if you're inclined to
join us behind the daily wire pay wall
well that would be potentially useful to
you and also uh what would you say
welcome from our perspective the daily
wire in their collaborations with me
have certainly extended my ability to
have conversations like this and to make
them freely available and have been
really good and forthright partners in
that endeavor so anyways Ian will thank
you very much for talking to me today
it's a pleasure to see you um and uh it
was really good to hear what you had to
say and to delve into these things more
deeply and uh well I'm looking forward
to the next half an hour of our
conversation and also to seeing you
again in the future and to everybody
who's watching and listening and to the
film crew here in Fairview Alberta which
is my small Hometown in the middle of
nowhere up on The Frigid ples of the
Northwest um thank you guys for coming
in from Saskatoon and doing this and
thank you again Ian much appreciated
Jordan you're welcome thank you very
much
[Music]